---
title: Application Structure and I/O
subtitle: I/O - aye, no?
tags: []
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
author: pscott
layout: doc_na
---

#### Sections in this article
{:.no_toc}
* TOC
{:toc}

## Introduction

Many of the existing BOLOS applications are based on a smartcard
architecture. This is because BOLOS applications are not meant to run
standalone, but rather assist a host process (on a computer /
smartphone) to perform a secure task (signing a message, encryption /
decryption, etc.). Therefore the device is commonly addressed using a
command / response scheme. Numerous design decisions have been made when
developing the SDKs in order to support this model.

However, the Event / Commands / Status model is designed to avoid
limitations on the application, as it does not follow the command /
response synchronous model. Developers are free to work around the model
and redesign a custom event processing loop to suit their needs.

### APDU Interpretation Loop

The command / response scheme used to address the device is similar to
the [ISO/IEC
7816-4](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_card_application_protocol_data_unit)
smartcard protocol. Each command / response packet is called an APDU.
The application is driven by a never-ending APDU interpretation loop
called straight from the application main function.

Each cycle of the APDU interpretation loop calls `io_exchange(...)` from
the SDK, which first sends a response APDU (unless it's the first call,
in which case it sends nothing), and then receives the next command
APDU.

However, sometimes, a user confirmation to perform a security action
must be performed before replying to an APDU (for example, when signing
a message). Such behavior is handled by replying no data to the command
in the APDU interpreter by using the `IO_ASYNCH_REPLY` flag, then
following the user action calling `io_exchange` with the
`IO_RETURN_AFTER_TX` flag and with the amount of data to reply to the
stalled command.

For an example of this feature, refer to
[blue-app-samplesign](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/blue-sample-apps/blob/2fb0f8f68ef68bbecd601cf476e532177288a0fa/blue-app-samplesign/src/main.c).
In this app, when the command APDU to sign a message is received (line
510), the flag `IO_ASYNCH_REPLY` is set and no response APDU is sent. If
the user approves the action, then the button push handler calls
`io_seproxyhal_touch_approve(...)` which sends the response APDU using
another call to `io_exchange(...)` with the `IO_RETURN_AFTER_TX` flag
set (line 434). The same occurs if the user denies the action, in which
case `io_seproxyhal_touch_deny(...)` is triggered.

### Protocols

It's important to understand that the APDU protocol used by most BOLOS
applications is not implemented by BOLOS itself. Instead, the APDU
interpretation is performed entirely by the SDK. This means that
applications can choose to implement another protocol on top of the
transport layer (USB HID, USB CCID, BLE, ...) instead of APDU. In fact,
the same is true for the transport layer protocols. Applications can
customize the way the application is enumerated as a USB device by the
host.

<figure>
<img src="../Images/common_protocols.png" class="align-center" alt="Common protocols across BOLOS applications" /><figcaption aria-hidden="true">Common protocols across BOLOS applications</figcaption>
</figure>

### Unprocessed Events

APDU processing relies on the BOLOS way of framing / transporting APDU
packets. All event processing related to transfer operations (including
USB) is performed within `io_exchange(...)`. Not considering
customization of the transport, some Events are not automagically
processed by `io_exchange(...)` (for example: Button Push Events,
Display Processed Events, Ticker Events, ...). In order to handle these
events that cannot be handled automagically, `io_exchange(...)` calls
`io_event(...)` which is defined by the application (not by the SDK).

Developers must take great care in the way they process Events. Events
might occur in the middle of APDU transport (most likely Button Push or
Ticker Events). As such, `io_event(...)` must return `1` if events are
expected, otherwise the current APDU transport will be terminated (this
feature could be used to implement a timeout, for example).

Thanks to a hardware buffer in the SE, it is impossible to miss an Event
packet. And, due to the E/Cs/S protocol design, no Event will be sent by
the MCU until a new Status is sent by the application.

