---
title: Low-level display management
subtitle: Hold your breath. Then jump in
tags: []
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
author: pscott
layout: doc_na
---

#### Sections in this article
{:.no_toc}
* TOC
{:toc}

## Introduction

<div class="warning">

<div class="title">

Warning

</div>

This article only concerns about 1% of users who wish to get a deeper
understanding / design more advanced flows. Feel free to skip it!

</div>

## BAGLs and BOLOSS

The BOLOS SDKs contain a toolkit for building GUIs called the BOLOS
Application Graphics Library (BAGL). BAGL defines a few useful types,
most notably `bagl_element_t`. This type defines a single display
element, such as a rectangle, a line of text, a touchable button (in the
case of the Ledger Blue), et cetera. Therefore, an entire GUI consists
of an entire array of such elements. As the device hardware, including
the screen, is managed by the MCU, the BAGL elements need to be
transported to the MCU over SEPROXYHAL in order to display them. This is
done using a Display Status.

A Display Status may be used to send a single BAGL element to the MCU.
However, due to the design of the E/Cs/S protocol, in order to send a
sequence of BAGL elements the application must asynchronously send
Display Statuses and wait for Display Processed Events before sending
the next one, as well as handling the other Events that are received
from the MCU in the mean time. As this is something that must be done by
every BOLOS application, a set of utilities have been defined in the SDK
to facilitate this process. These utilities also simplify the process of
handling user input events, such as button presses.

### Asynchronous Display and Interaction Helpers

To facilitate the process of implementing an asynchronous display
manager loop, a set of macros have been defined in the BOLOS SDKs. All
these macros have the prefix `UX_`, and use a global variable of type
`ux_state_t` called `ux` to maintain the user interface state.

`UX_INIT(...)`  
This macro is to be called when initializing the application, prior to
sending the first Display Status.

`UX_DISPLAY(...)`  
This macro takes an array of BAGL elements to be displayed and renders
them, asynchronously. It is to be called when a new screen is to be
displayed over the current one. This macro only sends the first element
of the given array using a Display Status. Therefore, further Commands
and Statuses are prohibited until the Display Processed Event is sent by
the MCU.

`UX_REDISPLAY()`  
This macro restarts the process of drawing the current screen. It
behaves like `UX_DISPLAY(...)`, but takes no arguments.

`UX_DISPLAYED()`  
This macro returns 0 when the array requested to be displayed by
`UX_DISPLAY(...)` or `UX_REDISPLAY()` has not been displayed entirely,
or a non-zero value when it has.

`UX_DISPLAYED_EVENT(...)`  
This macro is to be called to handle Display Processed Events (generally
in the `io_event(...)` function). It displays the next element in the
array given as a parameter to `UX_DISPLAY(...)`. This macro sends a
Display Status if an element remains to be displayed in the given array.
Therefore, further Commands and Statuses are prohibited until the
Display Processed Event is sent by the MCU.

`UX_BUTTON_PUSH_EVENT(...)`  
This macro facilitates handling of Button Push Events, by setting the
button released flag and calling the button handler implicitly passed to
`UX_DISPLAY(...)`.

See [the sample apps](https://github.com/LedgerHQ/blue-sample-apps) for
examples of how to use these macros. The main concept to remember is
that after a Display Status has been sent, the application must wait,
asynchronously, for the Display Processed Event before being able to
continue to display more elements of the GUI.

### BOLOS UX

The BOLOS UX is the implementation of the device-wide user interface; it
is a component of the `dashboard <dashboard>`. Applications delegate
certain jobs to the BOLOS UX in order to retain consistency across all
apps for certain UI components (like the status bar on the Ledger Blue),
as well as to allow the operating system to override the application's
UI when necessary (for example, when locking the screen). The
application interfaces with the BOLOS UX using `os_ux(...)`, which is a
syscall. However, applications don't need to call this function directly
as it is automatically called by the display interaction helpers (the
`UX_` macros).

Applications should delegate Events like Button Push Events to the BOLOS
UX (in this case, using `UX_BUTTON_PUSH_EVENT(...)`) instead of handling
them directly in case the BOLOS UX needs to override the application's
UI. If the event is consumed by the BOLOS UX (for example, a button
press while the user is unlocking the screen) then the event is not
passed on to the application.

